The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Burning Bridge, by Poul William Anderson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Burning Bridge

Author: Poul William Anderson

Illustrator: van Dongen

Release Date: September 9, 2007 [EBook #22554]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BURNING BRIDGE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Bruce Albrecht, Stephen Blundell
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









[Illustration]




THE BURNING BRIDGE

BY POUL ANDERSON

Illustrated by van Dongen


              _Usually there are two "reasons" why
               something is done; the reason why it
               needs to be done, and, quite separate, the
               reason people want to do it. The foul-up
               starts when the reason-for-wanting
               is satisfied ... and the need remains!_


The message was an electronic shout, the most powerful and
tightly-beamed short-wave transmission which men could generate,
directed with all the precision which mathematics and engineering could
offer. Nevertheless that pencil must scrawl broadly over the sky, and
for a long time, merely hoping to write on its target. For when
distances are measured in light-weeks, the smallest errors grow
monstrous.

As it happened, the attempt was successful. Communications Officer
Anastas Mardikian had assembled his receiver after acceleration
ceased--a big thing, surrounding the flagship _Ranger_ like a spiderweb
trapping a fly--and had kept it hopefully tuned over a wide band. The
radio beam swept through, ghostly faint from dispersion, wave length
doubled by Doppler effect, ragged with cosmic noise. An elaborate system
of filters and amplifiers could make it no more than barely
intelligible.

But that was enough.

Mardikian burst onto the bridge. He was young, and the months had not
yet devoured the glory of his first deep-space voyage. "Sir!" he yelled.
"A message ... I just played back the recorder ... from Earth!"

Fleet Captain Joshua Coffin started. That movement, in weightlessness,
spun him off the deck. He stopped himself with a practiced hand,
stiffened, and rapped back: "If you haven't yet learned regulations, a
week of solitary confinement may give you a chance to study them."

"I ... but, sir--" The other man retreated. His uniform made a loose
rainbow splash across metal and plastic. Coffin alone, of all the
fleet's company, held to the black garments of a space service long
extinct.

"But, sir," said Mardikian. His voice seemed to have fallen off a high
cliff. "Word from Earth!"

"Only the duty officer may enter the bridge without permission," Coffin
reminded him. "If you had anything urgent to tell, there is an
intercom."

"I thought--" choked Mardikian. He paused, then came to the free-fall
equivalent of attention. Anger glittered in his eyes. "Sorry, sir."

Coffin hung quiet a while, looking at the dark young man in the
brilliant clothes. _Forget it_, he said to himself. _Times are another.
You went once to e Eridani, and almost ninety years had passed when you
returned. Earth was like a foreign planet. This is as good as spacemen
get to be nowadays, careless, superstitious, jabbering among each other
in languages I don't understand. Thank God there are any recruits at
all, and hope He will let there continue to be a few for what remains of
your life._

The duty officer, Hallmyer, was tall and blond and born in Lancashire;
but he watched the other two with Asian eyes. No one spoke, though
Mardikian breathed heavily. Stars filled the bow viewport, crowding a
huge night.

Coffin sighed. "Very well," he said. "I'll let it pass this time."

After all, he reflected, a message from Earth was an event. Radio had,
indeed, gone between Sol and Alpha Centauri, but that was with very
special equipment. To pinpoint a handful of ships, moving at half the
speed of light, and to do it so well that the comparatively small
receiver Mardikian had erected would pick up the beam--Yes, the boy had
some excuse for gladness.

"What was the signal?" Coffin inquired.

He expected it would only be routine, a test, so that engineers a
lifetime hence could ask the returning fleet whether their transmission
had registered. (If there were any engineers by then, on an Earth
sinking into poverty and mysticism.)

Instead, Mardikian blurted: "Old Svoboda is dead. The new Psychologics
Commissioner is Thomas ... Thomson ... that part didn't record clearly
... anyway, he must be sympathetic to the Constitutionalists. He's
rescinded the educational decree--promised more consideration to
provincial mores. Come hear for yourself, sir!"

Despite himself, Coffin whistled. "But that's why the e Eridani colony
was being founded," he said. His words fell flat and silly into silence.

Hallmyer said, with the alien hiss in his English that Coffin hated, for
it was like the Serpent in a once noble garden:

"Apparently the colony has no more reason to be started. But how shall
we consult with three thousand would-be pioneers lying in deepsleep?"

"Shall we?" Coffin did not know why--not yet--but he felt his brain move
with the speed of fear. "We've undertaken to deliver them to Rustum. In
the absence of definite orders from Earth, are we even allowed to
consider a change of plans ... since a general vote can't be taken?
Better avoid possible trouble and not even mention--" He broke off.
Mardikian's face had become a mask of dismay.

"But, sir!" bleated the Com officer.

A chill rose up in Coffin. "You have already told," he said.

"Yes," whispered Mardikian. "I met Coenrad de Smet, he had come over to
this ship for some repair parts, and ... I never thought--"

"Exactly!" growled Coffin.

The fleet numbered fifteen, more than half the interstellar ships
humankind possessed. But Earth's overlords had been as anxious to get
rid of the Constitutionalists (the most stubborn ones, at least; the
stay-at-homes were _ipso facto_ less likely to be troublesome) as that
science-minded, liberty-minded group of archaists were to escape being
forcibly absorbed by modern society. Rustum, e Eridani II, was six
parsecs away, forty-one years of travel, and barely habitable: but the
only possible world yet discovered. A successful colony would be
prestigious, and could do no harm; its failure would dispose of a thorn
in the official ribs. Tying up fifteen ships for eight decades was all
right too. Exploration was a dwindling activity, which interested fewer
men each generation.

       *       *       *       *       *

So Earth's government co-operated fully. It even provided speeches and
music when the colonists embarked for the orbiting fleet. After which,
Coffin thought, the government had doubtless grinned to itself and
thanked its various heathen gods that that was over with.

"Only now," he muttered, "it isn't."

He free-sat in the _Ranger's_ general room, a tall, bony, faintly
grizzled Yankee, and waited. The austerity of the walls was broken by a
few pictures. Coffin had wanted to leave them bare--since no one else
would care for a view of the church where his father had preached, a
hundred years ago, or be interested in a model of that catboat the boy
Joshua had sailed on a bay which glittered in summers now forgotten--but
even the theoretically absolute power of a fleet captain had its limits.
At least the men nowadays were not making this room obscene with naked
women. Though in all honesty, he wasn't sure he wouldn't rather have
that than ... brush-strokes on rice paper, the suggestion of a tree, and
a classic ideogram. He did not understand the new generations.

The _Ranger_ skipper, Nils Kivi, was like a breath of home: a small
dapper Finn who had traveled with Coffin on the first e Eridani trip.
They were not exactly friends, an admiral has no intimates, but they had
been young in the same decade.

_Actually_, thought Coffin, _most of us spacemen are anachronisms. I
could talk to Goldstein or Yamato or Pereira, to quite a few on this
voyage, and not meet blank surprise when I mentioned a dead actor or
hummed a dead song. But of course, they are all in unaging deepsleep
now. We'll stand our one-year watches in turn, and be put back in the
coldvats, and have no chance to talk till journey's end_.

"It may prove to be fun," mused Kivi.

"What?" asked Coffin.

"To walk around High America again, and fish in the Emperor River, and
dig up our old camp," said Kivi. "We had some fine times on Rustum,
along with all the work and danger."

Coffin was startled, that his own thoughts should have been so closely
followed. "Yes," he agreed, remembering strange wild dawns on the Cleft
edge, "that was a pretty good five years."

Kivi sighed. "Different this time," he said. "Now that I think about it,
I am not sure I do want to go back. We had so much hope then--we were
discoverers, walking where men had never even laid eyes before. Now the
colonists will be the hopeful ones. We are just their transportation."

Coffin shrugged. "We must take what is given us, and be thankful."

"This time," said Kivi, "I will constantly worry: suppose I come home
again and find my job abolished? No more space travel at all. If that
happens, I refuse to be thankful."

_Forgive him_, Coffin asked his God. _It is cruel to watch the
foundation of your life being gnawed away._

Kivi's eyes lit up, the briefest flicker. "Of course," he said, "if we
really do cancel this trip, and go straight back, we may not arrive too
late. We may still find a few expeditions to new stars being organized,
and get on their rosters."

Coffin tautened. Again he was unsure why he felt an emotion: now, anger.
"I shall permit no disloyalty to the purpose for which we are engaged,"
he clipped.

"Oh, come off it," said Kivi. "Be rational. I don't know your reason for
undertaking this wretched cruise. You had rank enough to turn down the
assignment; no one else did. But you still want to explore as badly as
I. If Earth didn't care about us, they would not have bothered to invite
us back. Let us seize the opportunity while it lasts." He intercepted a
reply by glancing at the wall chrono. "Time for our conference." He
flicked the intership switch.

       *       *       *       *       *

A panel came to life, dividing into fourteen sections, one for each
accompanying vessel. One or two faces peered from each. The craft which
bore only supplies and sleeping crewmen were represented by their
captains. Those which had colonists also revealed a civilian spokesman.

Coffin studied every small image in turn. The spacemen he knew, they all
belonged to the Society and even those born long after him had much in
common. There was a necessary minimum discipline of mind and body, and
the underlying dream for which all else had been traded: new horizons
under new suns. Not that spacemen indulged in such poetics; they had too
much work to do.

The colonists were something else. Coffin shared things with
them--predominantly North American background, scientific habit of
thought, distrust of all governments. But few Constitutionalists had any
religion; those who did were Romish, Jewish, Buddhist, or otherwise
alien to him. All were tainted with the self-indulgence of this era:
they had written into their covenant that only physical necessity could
justify moralizing legislation, and that free speech was limited only by
personal libel. Coffin thought sometimes he would be glad to see the
last of them.

"Are you all prepared?" he began. "Very well, let's get down to
business. It's unfortunate the Com officer gossiped so loosely. He
stirred up a hornet's nest." Coffin saw that few understood the idiom.
"He made discontent which threatens this whole project, and which we
must now deal with."

Coenrad de Smet, colonist aboard the _Scout_, smiled in an irritating
way he had. "You would simply have concealed the fact?" he asked.

"It would have made matters easier," said Coffin stiffly.

"In other words," said de Smet, "you know better what we might want than
we do ourselves. That, sir, is the kind of arrogance we hoped to escape.
No man has the right to suppress any information bearing on public
affairs."

A low voice, with a touch of laughter, said through a hood: "And you
accuse Captain Coffin of preaching!"

The New Englander's eyes were drawn to her. Not that he could see
through the shapeless gown and mask, such as hid all the waking women;
but he had met Teresa Zeleny on Earth. Hearing her now was somehow like
remembering Indian summer on a wooded hilltop, a century ago.

An involuntary smile quirked his lips. "Thank you," he said. "Do you,
Mr. de Smet, know what the sleeping colonists might want? Have you any
right to decide for _them_? And yet we can't wake them, even the adults,
to vote. There simply isn't room; if nothing else, the air regenerators
couldn't supply that much oxygen. That's why I felt it best to tell no
one, until we were actually at Rustum. Then those who wished could
return with the fleet, I suppose."

"We could rouse them a few at a time, let them vote, and put them back
to sleep," suggested Teresa Zeleny.

"It would take weeks," said Coffin. "You, of all people, should know
metabolism isn't lightly stopped, or easily restored."

"If you could see my face," she said, again with a chuckle, "I would
grimace amen. I'm so sick of tending inert human flesh that ... well,
I'm glad they're only women and girls, because if I also had to massage
and inject men I'd take a vow of chastity!"

Coffin blushed, cursed himself for blushing, and hoped she couldn't see
it over the telecircuit. He noticed Kivi grin.

       *       *       *       *       *

Kivi provided the merciful interruption. "Your few-at-a-time proposal is
pointless anyhow," he said. "In the course of those weeks, we would pass
the critical date."

"What's that?" asked a young girl's voice.

"You don't know?" said Coffin, surprised.

"Let it pass for now," broke in Teresa. Once again, as several times
before, Coffin admired her decisiveness. She cut through nonsense with a
man's speed and a woman's practicality. "Take our word for it, June, if
we don't turn about within two months, we'll do better to go on to
Rustum. So, voting is out. We could wake a few sleepers, but those
already conscious are really as adequate a statistical sample."

Coffin nodded. She spoke for five women on her ship, who stood a
year-watch caring for two hundred ninety-five asleep. The one hundred
twenty who would not be restimulated for such duty during the voyage,
were children. The proportion on the other nine colonist-laden vessels
was similar; the crew totaled one thousand six hundred twenty, with
forty-five up and about at all times. Whether the die was cast by less
than two per cent, or by four or five per cent, was hardly significant.

"Let's recollect exactly what the message was," said Coffin. "The
educational decree which directly threatened your Constitutionalist way
of life has been withdrawn. You're no worse off now than formerly--and
no better, though there's a hint of further concessions in the future.
You're invited home again. That's all. We have not picked up any other
transmissions. It seems very little data on which to base so large a
decision."

"It's an even bigger one, to continue," said de Smet. He leaned forward,
a bulky man, until he filled his little screen. Hardness rang in his
tones. "We were able people, economically rather well off. I daresay
Earth already misses our services, especially in technological fields.
Your own report makes Rustum out a grim place; many of us would die
there. Why should we not turn home?"

"Home," whispered someone.

The word filled a sudden quietness, like water filling a cup, until
quietness brimmed over with it. Coffin sat listening to the voice of his
ship, generators, ventilators, regulators, and he began to hear a beat
frequency which was _Home_, _home_, _home_.

Only his home was gone. His father's church was torn down for an
Oriental temple, and the woods where October had burned were cleared for
another tentacle of city, and the bay was enclosed to make a plankton
farm. For him, only a spaceship remained, and the somehow cold hope of
heaven.

A very young man said, almost to himself: "I left a girl back there."

"I had a little sub," said another. "I used to poke around the Great
Barrier Reef, skindiving out the air lock or loafing on the surface. You
wouldn't believe how blue the waves could be. They tell me on Rustum you
can't come down off the mountain tops."

"But we'd have the whole planet to ourselves," said Teresa Zeleny.

One with a gentle scholar's face answered: "That may be precisely the
trouble, my dear. Three thousand of us, counting children, totally
isolated from the human mainstream. Can we hope to build a civilization?
Or even maintain one?"

"Your problem, pop," said the officer beside him dryly, "is that there
are no medieval manuscripts on Rustum."

[Illustration]

"I admit it," said the scholar. "I thought it more important my children
grow up able to use their minds. But if it turns out they can do so on
Earth--How much chance will the first generations on Rustum have to sit
down and really think, anyway?"

"Would there even be a next generation on Rustum?"

"One and a quarter gravities--I can feel it now."

"Synthetics, year after year of synthetics and hydroponics, till we can
establish an ecology. I had steak on Earth, once in a while."

"My mother couldn't come. Too frail. But she's paid for a hundred years
of deepsleep, all she could afford ... just in case I do return."

"I designed skyhouses. They won't build anything on Rustum much better
than sod huts, in my lifetime."

"Do you remember moonlight on the Grand Canyon?"

"Do you remember Beethoven's Ninth in the Federal Concert Hall?"

"Do you remember that funny little Midlevel bar, where we all drank beer
and sang _Lieder_?"

"Do you remember?"

"Do you remember?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Teresa Zeleny shouted across their voices: "In Anker's name! What are
you thinking about? If you care so little, you should never have
embarked in the first place!"

It brought back the silence, not all at once but piece by piece, until
Coffin could pound the table and call for order. He looked straight at
her hidden eyes and said: "Thank you, Miss Zeleny. I was expecting tears
to be uncorked any moment."

One of the girls snuffled behind her mask.

Charles Lochaber, speaking for the _Courier_ colonists, nodded. "Aye,
'tis a blow to our purpose. I am not so sairtain I myself would vote to
continue, did I feel the message was to be trusted."

"What?" De Smet's square head jerked up from between his shoulders.

Lochaber grinned without much humor. "The government has been getting
more arbitrary each year," he said. "They were ready enough to let us
go, aye. But they may regret it now--not because we could ever be any
active threat, but because we will be a subversive example, up there in
Earth's sky. Or just because we will _be_. Mind ye, I know not for
sairtain; but 'tis possible they decided we are safer dead, and this is
to trick us back. 'Twould be characteristic dictatorship behavior."

"Of all the fantastic--" gasped an indignant female voice.

Teresa broke in: "Not as wild as you might think, dear. I have read a
little history, and I don't mean that censored pap which passes for it
nowadays. But there's another possibility, which I think is just as
alarming. That message may be perfectly honest and sincere. But will it
still be true when we get back? Remember how long that will take! And
even if we could return overnight, to an Earth which welcomed us home,
what guarantee would there be that our children, or our grandchildren,
won't suffer the same troubles as us, without the same chance to break
free?"

"Ye vote, then, to carry on?" asked Lochaber.

Pride answered: "Of course."

"Good lass. I, too."

Kivi raised his hand. Coffin recognized him, and the spaceman said: "I
am not sure the crew ought not to have a voice in this also."

"What?" De Smet grew red. He gobbled for a moment before he could get
out: "Do you seriously think you could elect us to settle on that annex
of hell--and then come home to Earth yourselves?"

"As a matter of fact," said Kivi, smiling, "I suspect the crew would
prefer to return at once. I know I would. Seven years may make a crucial
difference."

"If a colony is planted, though," said Coffin, "it might provide the
very inspiration which space travel needs to survive."

"Hm-m-m. Perhaps. I shall have to think about that."

"I hope you realize," said the very young man with ornate sarcasm, "that
every second we sit here arguing takes us one hundred fifty thousand
kilometers farther from home."

"Dinna fash yourself," said Lochaber. "Whatever we do, that girl of
yours will be an auld carline before you reach Earth."

De Smet was still choking at Kivi: "You lousy little ferryman, if you
think you can make pawns of us--"

And Kivi stretched his lips in anger and growled, "If you do not watch
your language, you clodhugger, I will come over there and stuff you down
your own throat."

"Order!" yelled Coffin. "Order!"

Teresa echoed him: "Please ... for all our lives' sake ... don't you
know where we are? You've got a few centimeters of wall between you and
zero! Please, whatever we do, we can't fight or we'll never see any
planet again!"

But she did not say it weeping, or as a beggary. It was almost a
mother's voice--strange, in an unmarried woman--and it quieted the male
snarling more than Coffin's shouts.

The fleet captain said finally: "That will do. You're all too worked up
to think. Debate is adjourned sixteen hours. Discuss the problem with
your shipmates, get some sleep, and report the consensus at the next
meeting."

"_Sixteen hours?_" yelped someone. "Do you know how much return time
that adds?"

"You heard me," said Coffin. "Anybody who wants to argue may do so from
the brig. Dismissed!"

He snapped off the switch.

Kivi, temper eased, gave him a slow confidential grin. "That
heavy-father act works nearly every time, no?"

Coffin pushed from the table. "I'm going out," he said. His voice
sounded harsh to him, a stranger's. "Carry on."

He had never felt so alone before, not even the night his father died.
_O God, who spake unto Moses in the wilderness, reveal now thy will._
But God was silent, and Coffin turned blindly to the only other help he
could think of.

       *       *       *       *       *

Space armored, he paused a moment in the air lock before continuing. He
had been an astronaut for twenty-five years--for a century if you added
time in the vats--but he could still not look upon naked creation
without fear.

An infinite blackness flashed: stars beyond stars, to the bright
ghost-road of the Milky Way and on out to other galaxies and flocks of
galaxies, until the light which a telescope might now register had been
born before the Earth. Looking from his air-lock cave, past the radio
web and the other ships, Coffin felt himself drown in enormousness,
coldness, and total silence--though he knew that this vacuum burned and
roared with man-destroying energies, roiled like currents of gas and
dust more massive than planets and travailed with the birth of new
suns--and he said to himself the most dreadful of names, _I am that I
am_, and sweat formed chilly little globules under his arms.

This much a man could see within the Solar System. Traveling at half
light-speed stretched the human mind still further, till often it ripped
across and another lunatic was shoved into deepsleep. For aberration
redrew the sky, crowding stars toward the bows, so that the ships
plunged toward a cloud of Doppler hell-blue. The constellations lay
thinly abeam, you looked out upon the dark. Aft, Sol was still the
brightest object in heaven, but it had gained a sullen red tinge, as if
already grown old, as if the prodigal would return from far places to
find his home buried under ice.

_What is man that thou art mindful of him?_ The line gave its accustomed
comfort; for, after all, the Sun-maker had also wrought this flesh, atom
by atom, and at the very least would think it worthy of hell. Coffin had
never understood how his atheist colleagues endured free space.

Well--

He took aim at the next hull and fired his little spring-powered
crossbow. A light line unreeled behind the magnetic bolt. He tested its
security with habitual care, pulled himself along until he reached the
companion ship, yanked the bolt loose and fired again, and so on from
hull to slowly orbiting hull, until he reached the _Pioneer_.

Its awkward ugly shape was like a protective wall against the stars.
Coffin drew himself past the ion tubes, now cold. Their skeletal
structure seemed impossibly frail to have hurled forth peeled atoms at
one half c. Mass tanks bulked around the vessel; allowing for
deceleration, plus a small margin, the mass ratio was about nine to one.
Months would be required at Rustum to refine enough reaction material
for the home voyage. Meanwhile such of the crew as were not thus engaged
would help the colony get established--

If it ever did!

Coffin reached the forward air lock and pressed the "doorbell." The
outer valve opened for him, and he cycled through. First Officer
Karamchand met him and helped him doff armor. The other man on duty
found an excuse to approach and listen; for monotony was as corrosive
out here as distance and strangeness.

"Ah, sir. What brings you over?"

Coffin braced himself. Embarrassment roughened his tone: "I want to see
Miss Zeleny."

"Of course--But why come yourself? I mean, the telecircuit--"

"In person!" barked Coffin.

"What?" escaped the crewman. He propelled himself backward in terror of
a wigging. Coffin ignored it.

"Emergency," he snapped. "Please intercom her and arrange for a private
discussion."

"Why ... why ... yes, sir. At once. Will you wait here ... I mean ...
yes, sir!" Karamchand shot down the corridor.

Coffin felt a sour smile on his own lips. He could understand if they
got confused. His own law about the women had been like steel, and now
he violated it himself.

The trouble was, he thought, no one knew if it was even required. Until
now there had been few enough women crossing space, and then only within
the Solar System, on segregated ships. There was no background of
interstellar experience. It seemed reasonable, though, that a man on his
year-watch should not be asked to tend deepsleeping female colonists.
(Or vice versa!) The idea revolted Coffin personally; but for once the
psychotechs had agreed with him. And, of course, waking men and women,
freely intermingling, were potentially even more explosive. Haremlike
seclusion appeared the only answer; and husband and wife were not to be
awake at the same time.

Bad enough to see women veiled when there was a telecircuit conference.
(Or did the masks make matters still worse, by challenging the
imagination? Who knew?) Best seal off the living quarters and coldvat
sections of the craft which bore them. Crewmen standing watches on those
particular ships had better return to their own vessels to sleep and
eat.

Coffin braced his muscles. _The rules wouldn't apply if a large meteor
struck_, he reminded himself. _What has come up is more dangerous than
that. So never mind what anyone thinks._

Karamchand returned to salute him and say breathlessly: "Miss Zeleny
will see you, captain. This way, if you please."

"Thanks." Coffin followed to the main bulkhead. The women had its
doorkey. Now the door stood ajar. Coffin pushed himself through so hard
that he overshot and caromed off the farther wall.

Teresa laughed. She closed the door and locked it. "Just to make them
feel safe out there," she said. "Poor well-meaning men! Welcome,
captain."

       *       *       *       *       *

He turned about, almost dreading the instant. Her tall form was decent
in baggy coveralls, but she had dropped the mask. She was not pretty, he
supposed: broad-faced, square-jawed, verging on spinsterhood. But he had
liked her way of smiling.

"I--" He found no words.

"Follow me." She led him down a short passage, hand-over-hand along the
null-gee rungs. "I've warned the other girls to stay away. You needn't
fear being shocked." At the end of the hall was a little partitioned-off
room. Few enough personal goods could be taken along, but she had made
this place hers, a painting, a battered Shakespeare, the works of Anker,
a microplayer. Her tapes ran to Bach, late Beethoven and Strauss, music
which could be studied endlessly. She took hold of a stanchion and
nodded, all at once grown serious.

"What do you want to ask me, captain?"

Coffin secured himself by the crook of an arm and stared at his hands.
The fingers strained against each other. "I wish I could give you a
clear reply," he said, very low and with difficulty. "You see, I've
never met anything like this before. If it involved only men, I guess I
could handle the problem. But there are women along, and children."

"And you want a female viewpoint. You're wiser than I had realized. But
why me?"

He forced himself to meet her eyes. "You appear the most sensible of the
women awake."

"Really!" She laughed. "I appreciate the compliment, but must you
deliver it in that parade-ground voice, and glare at me to boot? Relax,
captain." She cocked her head, studying him. Then: "Several of the girls
don't get this business of the critical point. I tried to explain, but I
was only an R.N. at home, and I'm afraid I muddled it rather. Could you
put it in words of one and a half syllables?"

"Do you mean the equal-time point?"

"The Point of No Return, some of them call it."

"Nonsense! It's only--Well, look at it this way. We accelerated from Sol
at one gravity. We dare not apply more acceleration, even though we
could, because so many articles aboard have been lightly built to save
mass--the coldvats, for example. They'd collapse under their own weight,
and the persons within would die, if we went as much as one-point-five
gee. Very well. It took us about one hundred eighty days to reach
maximum velocity. In the course of that period, we covered not quite
one-and-a-half light-months. We will now go free for almost forty years.
At the end of that time, we'll decelerate at one gee for some one
hundred eighty days, covering an additional light-month and a half, and
enter the e Eridani System with low relative speed. Our star-to-star
orbit was plotted with care, but of course the errors add up to many
Astronomical Units; furthermore, we have to maneuver, put our ships in
orbit about Rustum, send ferry craft back and forth. So we carry a
reaction-mass reserve which allows us a total velocity change of about
one thousand kilometers per second after journey's end.

"Now imagine we had changed our minds immediately after reaching full
speed. We'd still have to decelerate in order to return. So we'd be
almost a quarter light-year from Sol, a year after departure, before
achieving relative rest. Then, to come back three light-months at one
thousand K.P.S. takes roughly seventy-two years. But the whole round
trip as originally scheduled, with a one-year layover at Rustum, runs
just about eighty-three years!

"Obviously there's some point in time beyond which we can actually get
home quicker by staying with the original plan. This date lies after
eight months of free fall, or not quite fourteen months from departure.
We're only a couple of months from the critical moment right now; if we
start back at once, we'll still have been gone from Earth for about
seventy-six years. Each day we wait adds months to the return trip. No
wonder there's impatience!"

"And the relativity clock paradox makes it worse," Teresa said.

"Well, not too much," Coffin decided. "The tau factor is 0.87. Shipboard
time during eighty years of free fall amounts to about seventy years; so
far the difference isn't significant. And anyhow, we'll all spend most
of the time in deepsleep. What they're afraid of, the ones who want to
go back, is that the Earth they knew will have slipped away from them."

She nodded. "Can't they understand it already has?" she said.

It was like a blade stabbed into Coffin. Though he could not see why
that should be: surely he, of all men, knew how relentlessly time
flowed. He had already come back once, to an Earth scarcely
recognizable. The Society had been a kind of fixed point, but even it
had changed; and he--like Kivi, like all of them--was now haunted by the
fear of returning again and not finding any other spacemen whatsoever.

But when she spoke it--

       *       *       *       *       *

"Maybe they're afraid to understand," he said.

"You keep surprising me, captain," said Teresa with a hint of her smile.
"You actually show a bit of human sympathy."

_And_, thought a far-off part of Coffin, _you showed enough to put me at
ease by getting me to lecture you with safe impersonal figures_. But he
didn't mind. The fact was that now he could free-sit, face to face,
alone, and talk to her like a friend.

"Since we could only save about seven years by giving up at once," he
said, "I admit I'm puzzled why so many people are so anxious about it.
Couldn't we go on as planned and decide things at Rustum?"

"I think not," said Teresa. "You see, nobody in his right mind wants to
be a pioneer. To explore, yes; to settle rich new country with known and
limited hazards, yes; but not to risk his children, his whole racial
future, on a wild gamble. This group was driven into space by a conflict
which just couldn't be settled at home. If that conflict has ended--"

"But ... you and Lochaber ... you pointed out that it had _not_ ended.
That at best this is a breathing spell."

"Still, they'd like to believe otherwise, wouldn't they? I mean, at
least believe they have a fighting chance on Earth."

"All right," said Coffin. "But it looks a safe bet, that there are a
number of deepsleepers who'd agree with you, who'd think their chances
are actually better on Rustum. Why can't we take them there first? It
seems only fair."

"Uh-uh." Her hair was short, but it floated in loose waves when she
shook her head, and light rippled mahogany across it. "You've been there
and I haven't, but I've studied your reports. A handful couldn't
survive. Three thousand is none too many. It will have to be unanimous,
whatever is decided."

"I was trying to avoid that conclusion," he said wearily, "but if you
agree--Well, can't we settle the argument at Rustum, after they've
looked the place over?"

"No. And I'll tell you why, captain," she said. "I know Coenrad de Smet
well, and one or two others. Good men ... don't get me wrong ... but
born politicians, intuitive rather than logical thinkers. They believe,
quite honestly, it's best to go back. And, of course, the timid and lazy
and selfish ones will support them. They don't want to risk having
Rustum there, a whole new world for the taking--and the vote to go
against them. I've seen plenty of your photographs, captain. They were
so beautiful, some of them, that I can hardly wait for the reality. I
know--and so does de Smet--High America is a magnificent place. Room,
freedom, unpoisoned air. We'll remember all that we hated on Earth and
that isn't on Rustum; we'll reflect much more soberly how long a time
will have passed before we could possibly get back, and what a gamble
we'd be taking on finding a tolerable situation there. The extra quarter
gee won't seem so bad till it's time for heavy manual labor; the alien
biochemistry won't bother us much till we have to stop eating rations
and start trying to farm; the isolation won't really be felt till your
spaceships have departed and we're all the humanity there is for more
than twenty light-years.

"No ... de Smet won't risk it. He might get caught up in the glamour
himself!"

Coffin murmured thoughtfully: "After only a few days of deceleration,
there won't be enough reaction mass to do anything but continue home."

"De Smet knows that, too," said Teresa. "Captain, you can make a hard
decision and stick to it. That's why you have your job. But maybe you
forget how few people can--how most of us pray someone will come along
and tell us what to do. Even under severe pressure, the decision to go
to Rustum was difficult. Now that there's a chance to undo it, go back
to being safe and comfortable--but still a real risk that by the time we
get home, Earth will no longer be safe _or_ comfortable--we've been
forced to decide all over again. It's agony, captain! De Smet is a
strong man, in his way. He'll compel us to do the irrevocable, as soon
as possible, just because it will make a final commitment. Once we've
turned far enough back, it'll be out of our hands and we can stop
thinking."

He regarded her with a sort of wonder. "But you look calm enough," he
said.

"I made my decision back on Earth," she answered. "I've seen no reason
to change it."

       *       *       *       *       *

"What do the women think?" he asked, leaping back to safely denumerable
things.

"Most want to give up, of course." She said it with a mildness which
softened the judgment. "Few of them really wanted to come in the first
place. They did so only because their men insisted. Women are much too
practical to care about a philosophy, or a frontier, or anything except
their families."

"Do you?" he challenged her.

She shrugged ruefully. "I've no family, captain. At the same time, I
suppose ... a sense of humor? ... kept me from sublimating it into a
Cause of any kind." Counterattacking: "Why do you care what we do,
captain?"

"Why?" He was taken aback, and found himself stammering. "Why ...
because ... I'm in charge--"

"Oh, yes. But isn't it more than that? You spent years on Earth
lecturing about Rustum and its colonization. I think it must be a deep
symbol to you. Don't worry, I won't go analytic. I happen to think,
myself, that this colony is enormously important, objectively speaking,
I mean. If our race muffs this chance, we may never get another. But you
and I wouldn't care about that, not really, unless it was personally
important too. Would we? Why did you accept this thankless job,
commanding a colonial fleet? It can't be an itch to explore. Rustum's
already been visited once, and you'll have precious little time to carry
on any further studies. You could have been off to some star where men
have never traveled at all. Do you see, captain? You're not a bit more
cold-blooded about this than I. You _want_ that colony planted."

She stopped, laughed, and color went across her face. "Oh, dear, I do
chatter, don't I? Pardon me. Let's get back to business."

"I think," said Coffin, slowly and jaggedly, "I'm beginning to realize
what's involved."

She settled back and listened.

He bent a leg around a stanchion to hold his lean black frame in place
and beat one fist softly into the palm of another. "Yes, it is an
emotional issue," he said, the words carving the thoughts to shape.
"Logic has nothing to do with it. There are some who want so badly to go
to Rustum and be free, or whatever they hope to be there, that they'll
dice with their lives for the privilege--and their wives' and children's
lives. Others went reluctantly, against their own survival instincts,
and now that they think they see a way of retreat, something they can
justify to themselves, they'll fight any man who tries to bar it. Yes.
It's a ghastly situation.

"One way or another, the decision has got to be made soon. And the facts
can't be hidden. Every deepsleeper must be wakened and nursed to health
by someone now conscious. The word will pass, year after year, always to
a different combination of spacemen and colonists, with always a
proportion who're furious about what was decided while they slept. No,
furious is too weak a word. Onward or backward, whichever way we go,
we've struck at the emotional roots of people. And interstellar space
can break the calmest men. How long before just the wrong percentage of
malcontents, weaklings, and shaky sanities goes on duty? What's going to
happen then?"

He sucked in an uneven breath. "I'm sorry," he faltered. "I should
not--"

"Blow off steam? Why not?" she asked calmly. "Would it be better to keep
on being the iron man, till one day you put a pistol to your head?"

[Illustration]

"You see," he said in his misery, "I'm _responsible_. Men and women ...
all the little children--But I'll be in deepsleep. I'd go crazy if I
tried to stay awake the whole voyage; the organism can't take it. I'll
be asleep, and there'll be nothing I can do, but these ships were given
into my care!"

He began to shiver. She took both his hands. Neither of them spoke for a
long while.

       *       *       *       *       *

When he left the _Pioneer_, Coffin felt oddly hollow, as if he had
opened his chest and pulled out heart and lungs. But his mind functioned
with machine precision. For that he was grateful to Teresa: she had
helped him discover what the facts were. It was a brutal knowledge, but
without such understanding the expedition might well be doomed.

Or might it? Dispassionately, now, Coffin estimated chances. Either they
went on to Rustum or they turned back; in either case, the present
likelihood of survival was--fifty-fifty? Well, you couldn't gauge it in
percentages. Doubtless more safety lay in turning back. But even there
the odds were such that no sane man would willingly gamble. Certainly
the skipper had no right to take the hazard, if he could avoid it by any
means.

But what means were there?

As he hauled himself toward the _Ranger_, Coffin watched the receiver
web grow in his eyes, till it snared a distorted Milky Way. It seemed
very frail to have carried so much hell. And, indeed, it would have to
be dismantled before deceleration. No trick to sabotage the thing. _If
only I had known!_

Or if someone on Earth, the villain or well-meaning fool or whatever he
was who wrote that first message ... if only he would send another.
"Ignore preceding. Educational decree still in force." Or something. But
no. Such things didn't happen. A man had to make his own luck, in an
angry world.

Coffin sighed and clamped boot-soles to his flagship's air lock.

Mardikian helped him through. When he removed his hoarfrosted space
helmet, Coffin saw how the boy's mouth quivered. A few hours had put
years on Mardikian.

He was in medical whites. Unnecessarily, to break the silence with any
inane remark, Coffin said: "Going on vat duty, I see."

"Yes, sir." A mutter. "My turn." The armor made a lot of noise while
they stowed it. "We'll need some more ethanol soon, captain," blurted
Mardikian desperately.

       *       *       *       *       *

"What for?" grumbled Coffin. He had often wished the stuff were not
indispensable. He alone had the key to its barrel. Some masters allowed
a small liquor ration on voyage, and said Coffin was only disguising
prejudice in claiming it added risk. ("What the devil _can_ happen in
interstellar orbit? The only reason anyone stays conscious at all is the
machinery to care properly for sleepers would mass more than the extra
supplies do. You can issue the grog when a man comes off watch, can't
you? Oh, never mind, never mind! I'm just grateful I don't ship under
you!")

"Gammagen fixative ... and so on ... sir," stumbled Mardikian. "Mr.
Hallmyer will ... make the requisition as usual."

"All right." Coffin faced his radio man, captured the fearful eyes and
would not let them go. "Have there been any further communications?" he
snapped.

"From Earth? No. No, sir. I ... I wouldn't really expect it ... we're
about at the ... the ... the limit of reception now. It's almost a
miracle, sir, I suppose, that we picked up the first. Of course, we
might get another--" Mardikian's voice trailed off.

Coffin continued to stare. At last: "They've been giving you a hard
time, haven't they?"

"What?"

"The ones like Lochaber, who want to go on. They wish you'd had the
sense to keep your mouth shut, at least till you consulted me. And then
others, like de Smet, have said the opposite. Even over telecircuit,
it's no fun being a storm center, is it?"

"No, sir--"

       *       *       *       *       *

Coffin turned away. Why torment the fellow more? This thing had
happened, that was all. And the fewer who realized the danger, and were
thereby put under still greater strain, the less that danger would be.

"Avoid such disputes," said Coffin. "Most especially, don't brood over
those which do arise. That's just begging for a nervous breakdown--out
here. Carry on."

Mardikian gulped and went aft.

Coffin drifted athwartships. The vessel thrummed around him.

He was not on watch, and had no desire to share the bridge with whoever
was. He should eat something, but the idea was nauseating; he should try
to sleep, but that would be useless. How long had he been with Teresa,
while she cleared his mind and gave him what comfort she had to offer? A
couple of hours. In fourteen hours or less, he must confront the
spokesmen of crew and colonists. And meanwhile the fleet seethed.

On Earth, he thought wearily, a choice between going on and turning back
would not have drawn men so close to insanity, even if the time elements
had been the same. But Earth was long domesticated. Maybe, centuries
ago, when a few wind-powered hulks wallowed forth upon hugeness, unsure
whether they might sail off the world's edge--maybe then there had been
comparable dilemmas. Yes ... hadn't Columbus' men come near mutiny? Even
unknown, though, and monster-peopled by superstition, Earth had not been
as cruel an environment as space; nor had a caravel been as unnatural as
a spaceship. Minds could never have disintegrated as quickly in
mid-ocean as between the stars.

Coffin grew aware, startled, that he had wandered to the radio shack.

He entered. It was a mere cubbyhole, one wall occupied by gleaming
electronic controls, the rest full of racked equipment, tools, testers,
spare parts, half-assembled units for this and that special purpose. The
fleet did not absolutely need a Com officer--any spaceman could do the
minimal jobs, and any officer had intensive electronics training--but
Mardikian was a good, conscientious, useful technician.

His trouble was, perhaps, only that he was human.

Coffin pulled himself to the main receiver. A tape whirred slowly
between spools, preserving what the web gathered. Coffin looked at a
clipboard. Mardikian had written half an hour ago: "Nothing received.
Tape wiped and reset, 1530 hr." Maybe since then--? Coffin flipped a
switch. A scanner went quickly through the recording, found only cosmic
noise--none of the orderliness which would have meant code or
speech--and informed the man.

Now if it had just--

Coffin grew rigid. He floated among the mechanisms for a long time,
blank-eyed as they, and alone the quick harsh breath showed him to be
alive.

       *       *       *       *       *

_O God, help me do that which is right._

_But what is right?_

_I should wrestle with Thy angel until I knew. But there is no time.
Lord, be not wroth with me because I have no time._

Anguish ebbed. Coffin got busy.

Decision would be reached at the meeting, fourteen hours hence. A
message which was to make a substantial difference ought to be
received before then. But not very much before; nor too late,
eleventh-hour-reprieve style, either.

But first, what should its wording be? Coffin didn't have to look up the
last one. It was branded on his brain. An invitation to return and talk
matters over. But necessarily short, compact, with minimum redundancy:
which meant an increased danger of misinterpretation.

He braced himself before the typer and began to compose, struck out his
first words and started again, and again and again. It had to be exactly
right. A mere cancellation of the previous message wouldn't do after
all. Too pat. And a suspicion, brooded on during a year-watch, could be
as deadly as an outright sense of betrayal. So....

_Since fleet now approaching equal-time point, quick action necessary.
Colonization plans abandoned. Expedition ordered, repeat ordered to
return to Earth. Education decree already rescinded_ (a man back home
wouldn't be certain the first beam had made contact) _and appeals for
further concessions will be permitted through proper channels.
Constitutionalists reminded that their first duty is to put their skills
at disposal of society._

Would that serve? Coffin read it over. It didn't contradict the first
one; it only changed a suggestion to a command, as if someone were
growing more frantic by the hour. (And a picture of near-chaos in
government wasn't attractive, was it?) The bit about "proper channels"
underlined that speech was not free on Earth, and that the bureaucracy
could restore the school decree any time it wished. The pompous last
sentence ought to irritate men who had turned their backs on the thing
which Terrestrial society was becoming.

Maybe it could be improved, though--Coffin resumed work.

When he ripped out his last version, he was astonished to note that two
hours had passed. Already? The ship seemed very quiet. Too quiet. He
grew feverishly aware that anyone might break in on him at any time.

The tape could run for a day, but was usually checked and wiped every
six or eight hours. Coffin decided to put his words on it at a spot
corresponding to seven hours hence. Mardikian would have come off vat
duty, but probably be asleep; he wouldn't play back until shortly before
the council meeting.

Coffin turned to a small auxiliary recorder. He had to tape his voice
through a circuit which would alter it beyond recognition. And, of
course, the whole thing had to be blurred, had to fade and come back,
had to be full of squeals and buzzes and the crackling talk of the
stars. No easy job to blend all those elements, in null-gee at that.
Coffin lost himself in the task. He dared not do otherwise, for then he
would be alone with himself.

Plug in this modulator, add an oscillation--Let's see, where's that
slide rule, what quantities do you want for--

"What are you doing?"

Coffin twisted about. Fingers clamped on his heart.

Mardikian floated in the doorway, looking dazed and afraid as he saw who
the intruder was. "What's wrong, sir?" he asked.

"You're on watch," breathed Coffin.

"Tea break, sir, and I thought I'd check and--" The boy pushed himself
into the shack. Coffin saw him framed in meters and transformer banks,
like some futuristic saint. But sweat glistened on the dark young face,
broke free and drifted in tiny spheroids toward the ventilator.

"Get out of here," said Coffin thickly. And then: "No! I don't mean
that! Stay where you are!"

"But--" Almost, the captain could read a mind: _If the old man has gone
space-dizzy, name of fate, what's to become of us all?_ "Yes, sir."

Coffin licked sandy lips. "It's O.K.," he said. "You surprised me, our
nerves are on edge. That's why I hollered."

"S-s-sorry, sir."

"Anyone else around?"

"No, sir. All on duty or--" _I shouldn't have told him that!_ Coffin
read. _Now he knows I'm alone with him!_

"It's O.K., son," repeated the captain. But his voice came out like a
buzz saw cutting through bone. "I had a little project here I was, uh,
playing with, and ... uh--"

"Yes, sir. Of course." _Humor him till I can get away. Then see Mr.
Kivi. Let him take the responsibility. I don't want it! I don't want to
be the skipper, with nobody between me and the sky. It's too much. It'll
crack a man wide open._

       *       *       *       *       *

Mardikian's trapped eyes circled the little room. They fell on the
typer, and the drafts which Coffin had not yet destroyed.

Silence closed in.

"Well," said Coffin at last. "Now you know."

"Yes, sir." Mardikian could scarcely be heard.

"I'm going to fake this onto the receiver tape."

"B-b ... Yes, sir." _Humor him!_ Mardikian was drawn bowstring tight,
his nostrils flared by terror.

"You see," rasped Coffin, "it has to look genuine. This ought to get
their backs up. They'll be more united on colonizing Rustum than they
ever were before. At the same time, I can resist them, claim I have my
orders to turn about and don't want to get into trouble. Finally, of
course, I'll let myself be talked into continuing, however reluctantly.
So no one will suspect me of ... fraud."

Mardikian's lips moved soundlessly. He was close to hysteria, Coffin
saw.

"It's unavoidable," the captain said, and cursed himself for the
roughness in his tone. Though maybe no orator could persuade this boy.
What did he know of psychic breaking stress, who had never been tried to
his own limit? "We'll have to keep the secret, you and I, or--" No, what
was the use? Within Mardikian's small experience, it was so much more
natural to believe that one man, Coffin, had gone awry, than to
understand a month-by-month rotting of the human soul under loneliness
and frustration.

"Yes, sir," Mardikian husked. "Of course, sir."

_Even if he meant that_, Coffin thought, _he might talk in his sleep. Or
I might; but the admiral, alone of all the fleet, has a completely
private room_.

He racked his tools, most carefully, and faced about. Mardikian shoved
away, bulging-eyed. "No," whispered Mardikian. "No. Please."

He opened his mouth to scream, but he didn't get time. Coffin chopped
him on the neck. As he doubled up, Coffin gripped him with legs and one
hand, balled the other fist, and hit him often in the solar plexus.

Mardikian rolled in the air like a drowned man.

Swiftly, then, Coffin towed him down the corridor, to the pharmacy room.
He unlocked the alcohol barrel, tapped a hypo, diluted it with enough
water, and injected. Lucky the fleet didn't carry a real psychiatrist;
if you broke, you went into deepsleep and weren't revived till you got
home again to the clinics.

Coffin dragged the boy to a point near the air lock. Then he shouted.
Hallmyer came from the bridge. "He started raving and attacked me,"
panted the captain. "I had to knock him out."

Mardikian was revived for a check-up, but since he only mumbled
incoherently, he was given a sedative. Two men began processing him for
the vat. Coffin said he would make sure that the Com officer hadn't
damaged any equipment. He went back to the shack.

       *       *       *       *       *

Teresa Zeleny met him. She did not speak, but led him to her room again.

"Well," he said, strangling on it, "so we're continuing to Rustum, by
unanimous vote. Aren't you happy?"

"I was," she said quietly, "till now, when I see that you aren't. I
hardly think you're worried about legal trouble on Earth; you have
authority to ignore orders if the situation warrants. So what is the
matter?"

He stared beyond her. "I shouldn't have come here at all," he said. "But
I had to talk with someone, and only you might understand. Will you bear
with me a few minutes? I won't bother you again."

"Not till Rustum." Her smile was a gesture of compassion. "And it's no
bother." After waiting a bit: "What did you want to say?"

He told her, in short savage words.

She grew a little pale. "The kid was actually dead drunk, and they
didn't know it when they processed him?" she said. "That's a grave risk.
He might not live."

"I know," said Coffin, and covered his eyes.

Her hand fell on his shoulder. "I suppose you've done the only possible
thing," she said with much gentleness. "Or, if there was a better way,
you didn't have time to think of it."

He said through his fingers, while his head turned away from her: "If
you don't tell on me, and I know you won't, then you're violating your
own principles, too: total information, free discussion and decision.
Aren't you?"

She sighed. "I imagine so. But don't all principles have their limits?
How libertarian, or kind ... how human can you be, out here?"

"I shouldn't have told you."

"I'm glad you did."

Then, briskly, as if she, too, fled something, the woman said: "The
truth is bound to come out when your fleet returns to Earth, so we'll
need to work out a defense for you. Or is necessity enough?"

"It doesn't matter." He raised his head, and now he could again speak
steadily. "I don't figure to skulk more than I must. Let them say what
they will, eight decades from now. I'll already have been judged."

"What?" She retreated a little, perhaps to see the gaunt form better.
"You don't mean you'll stay on Rustum? But it isn't necessary!"

"A liar ... quite likely a murderer ... I am not worthy to be the master
of a ship." His voice cracked over. "And maybe, after all, there isn't
going to be any more space travel to come home to."

He jerked free of her and went through the door. She stared after him.
She had better let him out; no, the key had been left in the bulkhead
lock. She had no excuse to follow.

_You aren't alone, Joshua_, she wanted to call. _Every one of us is
beside you. Time is the bridge that always burns behind us._


THE END




Transcriber's Note

This etext was produced from _Astounding Science Fiction_ January 1960.
Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright
on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and typographical errors
have been corrected without note.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Burning Bridge, by Poul William Anderson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BURNING BRIDGE ***

***** This file should be named 22554.txt or 22554.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/2/5/5/22554/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Bruce Albrecht, Stephen Blundell
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
